# CHANGES - OpenPrinting CUPS Filters v2.0b3 - 2023-01-31

## CHANGES IN V2.0b3 (31st January 2023)

- texttopdf: Do not include fontconfig.h in the CUPS filter wrapper

- Build system: Do not explicitly check for libpoppler-cpp
  The cups-filters package does not contain any code using
  libpoppler-cpp, therefore we let ./configure not check for it.

- COPYING, NOTICE: Simplification for autotools-generated files
  autotools-generated files can be included under the license of the
  upstream code, and FSF copyright added to upstream copyright
  list. Simplified COPYING appropriately.

- Makefile.am: Include LICENSE in distribution tarball

- Add templates for issue reports on GitHub. This makes a selection
  screen appear when clicking "New Issue" in the web UI, to selct
  whether the issue is a regular bug, a feature request, or a security
  vulnerability.


## CHANGES IN V2.0b2 (8th January 2023)

- Corrected installation path for *.h files of *.drv files.  The ppdc
  (and underlying functions) of libppd searches for include files in
  /usr/share/ppdc and not in /usr/share/cups/ppdc any more.

- configure.ac: Remove unnecessary "AVAHI_GLIB_..." definitions.

- Makefile.am: Include NOTICE in distribution tarball

- configure.ac: Added "foreign" to to AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE() call. Makes
  automake not require a file named README.

- Cleaned up .gitignore

- Tons of fixes in the source code documentation: README.md, INSTALL,
  DEVELOPING.md, CONTRIBUTING.md, COPYING, NOTICE, ... Adapted to the
  cups-filters component, added links.


## CHANGES IN V2.0b1 (18th November 2022)

- Converted nearly all filters to filter functions, only exceptions
  are `rastertoescpx`, `rastertopclx`, `commandtoescpx`,
  `commandtopclx`, and `foomatic-rip`. The latter is deeply involved
  with Foomatic PPDs and the others are legacy printer drivers. The
  filter functions are mainly in libcupsfilters, the ones which
  generate PostScript are in libppd.

- Replaced all the filters converted to filter functions by simple
  wrapper executables using `ppdFilterCUPSWrapper()` of libppd for
  backward compatibility with CUPS 2.x.

- Added new streaming mode triggered by the boolean
  "filter-streaming-mode" option. In this mode a filter (function) is
  supposed to avoid everything which prevents the job data from
  streaming, as loading the whole job (or good part of it) into a
  temporary file or into memory, interpreting PDF, pre-checking input
  file type or zero-page jobs, ... This is mainly to be used by
  Printer Applications when they do raster printing in streaming mode,
  to run with lowest resources possible. Currently `foomatic-rip`,
  `ghostscript`, and `pdftopdf` got a streaming mode. For the former
  two PostScript (not PDF) is assumed as input and no zero-page-job
  check is done, in the latter all QPDF processing (page management,
  page size adjustment, ...) is skipped and only JCL according to the
  PPD added.

- The CUPS filter `imagetops` uses the `ppdFilterImageToPS()` filter
  function of libppd now.

- `driverless`, `driverless-fax`: Added IPP Fax Out support. Now
  printer setup tools list an additional fax "driver". A fax queue is
  created by selecting this driver. Jobs have to be sent with "-o
  phone=12345" to supply the destination phone number (Pull request
  #280, #293, #296, #302, #304, #305, #306, #309, Issue #298, #308).

- `sys5ippprinter`: Removed `sys5ippprinter`, as CUPS does not support
  System V interface scripts any more. This first approach of PPD-less
  printing was also not actually made use of.

- `urftopdf`: Removed as we require CUPS 2.2.2+ now which supports
  Apple Raster by itself.

- Build system, `README.md`: Require CUPS 2.2.2+. Removed now unneeded
  `./configure` switches for use of the `urftopdf` filter for old CUPS
  versions.

- Sample PPDs: Renamed source directory from `ppd/` to `ppdfiles/`.

- Build system: Remove '-D_PPD_DEPRECATED=""' from the compiling
  command lines of the source files which use libcups. The flag is not
  supported any more for longer times already and all the PPD-related
  functions deprecated by CUPS have moved into libppd now.

- Build system: Add files in `.gitignore` that are generated by
  "autogen.sh", "configure", and "make" (Pull request #336).
